[Quant] Add quantization 2.0 document (#2354)
pytorch/tutorials: prototype_source/quantization_2_0_tutotial.rst

(prototype) PyTorch Quantization 2.0 Tutorial
==========================================

Today we have `FX Graph Mode
Quantization <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/quantization.html#prototype-fx-graph-mode-quantization>`__
which uses symbolic_trace to capture the model into a graph, and then
perform quantization transformations on top of the captured model. In a
similar way, for Quantization 2.0 flow, we will now use the PT2 Export
workflow to capture the model into a graph, and perform quantizations
transformations on top of the ATen dialect graph. This is expected to
have significantly higher model coverage, better programmability, and
a simplified UX.

Suppose we are a backend developer and we wish to integrate our backend
with PyTorch's quantization 2.0 flow. We only need to define the backend

> specific quantizer. An existing quantizer object defined for

Author: Thanks for the suggestions. The high level arch diagram has been added.

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.linear(x)

    example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 5),)
    model = M().eval()

    # Step 1: Trace the model into an FX graph of flattened ATen operators
    exported_graph_module, guards = torchdynamo.export(
        model,
        *copy.deepcopy(example_inputs),
        aten_graph=True,
    )

    # Step 2: Insert observers or fake quantize modules
    quantizer = qq.QNNPackQuantizer()
    operator_config = qq.get_symmetric_quantization_config(is_per_channel=True)
    quantizer.set_global(operator_config)
    prepared_graph_module = prepare_pt2e(exported_graph_module, quantizer)

    # Step 3: Quantize the model
    convered_graph_module = convert_pt2e(prepared_graph_module)

    # Step 4: Lower Reference Quantized Model into the backend

Inside the Quantizer, we will use the `QuantizationAnnotation API <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tjIsL7-uVgm_1bv_kUK7iovP6G1D5zcbzwEcmYEG2Js/edit#>`__
to convey user's intent for what quantization spec to use and how to
observe certain tensor values in the prepare step. Now, we will have a step by step
tutorial for how to use the `QuantizationAnnotation API` to create a quantizer.

> 1. Define QuantizationConfig

Reviewer: Before going into details, it would be helpful to explain some key concepts and how they are related and involved in the quantization flow, e.g., `QuantizationAnnotation`, `QuantizationSpec` (various kinds of spec) and `QuantizationConfig`.

Author: Thanks for the suggestions. I have added further explanations. Please help to take a look again.

Reviewer 2: this is actually not part of the annotation API, I think it's better to put this in the example quantizer section

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I think the definition of ``QuantizationConfig`` and skeleton of ``BackendQuantizer`` can introduce the basic concepts such as ``QuantizationConfig``, ``QuantizationSpec``. These concepts make user easier to understand what has been done inside the ``annotation API``. So I prefer to put it before introducing several use cases of `annotation API`. Please kindly let me know your thoughts.

Reviewer 2: `QuantizationConfig` is not part of the annotation api, annotation api includes: different types of QuantizationSpec and QuantizationAnnotation object

Author: Got it. I think `QuantizationConfig` will still be used in the final toy example. If we remove this section, will it be confused for user to run the final toy example?

--------------------------------------------------------

QuantizationConfig defines the data type and qscheme for activation, weight and bias. Suppose
we want to define:

-  Activation: `int8` data type, `per_tensor_affine` quantization, `HistogramObserver`
-  Weight    : `int8` data type, `per_channel_symmetric` quantization, `PerChannelMinMaxObserver`

> -  Bias      : `float` data type, `PlaceholderObserver`

Reviewer: Can we explain how the qconfig defined here how the defined `QuantizationSpec` here are used or related to the `QuantizationSpec`  used for annotating the model.

Author: Add more explanation for how `QuantizationConfig` is defined and how does `QuantizationSpec` been used to create observer when annotating the model.

            HistogramObserver
        act_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-128,
            quant_max=127,
            qscheme=torch.per_tensor_affine,
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=act_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(eps=2**-12),
        )

        weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = PerChannelMinMaxObserver
        extra_args: Dict[str, Any] = {"eps": 2**-12}
        weight_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-127,
            quant_max=127,
            qscheme=torch.per_channel_symmetric,
            ch_axis=0,
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(**extra_args),
        )

        bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = PlaceholderObserver
        bias_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.float,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr
        )
        quantization_config = QuantizationConfig(

>             act_quantization_spec, weight_quantization_spec, bias_quantization_spec, is_qat

Reviewer: Where is `is_qat` defined?

Author: Thanks, remove it.

        )
        return quantization_config

2. Define the BackendQuantizer
--------------------------------------------------------

Then we will define the skeleton of a BackendQuantizer. The annotatation methods for each operation will be

> defined later.

Reviewer: Suggest to explain the semantics of each method of the quantizer a backend needs to implement.

Author: Thanks for the comment. Add docstring for each method.

        ):
            self.operator_type_config[operator_type] = quantization_config
            return self

        def annotate(self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule) -> torch.fx.GraphModule:
            """just handling global spec for now"""
            global_config = self.global_config
            self.annotate_symmetric_config(model, global_config)

            return model

        def annotate_symmetric_config(
            self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule, config: QuantizationConfig
        ) -> torch.fx.GraphModule:
            for node in reversed(model.graph.nodes):
                # The annotation methods for each op will defined later
                pass
            return model

        def validate(self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule) -> None:
            pass

        @classmethod
        def get_supported_operators(cls) -> List[OperatorConfig]:
            return []

3. Annotate common operator patterns
--------------------------------------------------------

Now we will start to define the annotatation methods inside quantizer. For common operators like `conv2d`, we can use `QuantizationSpec` to

> annotate the input, weight, bias and output.

Author: Thanks, add the explanation of `get_act_qspec`, `get_weight_qspec` and `get_bias_qspec` together with `QuantizationConfig` and `QuantizationSpec` previously.

        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            self.global_config: QuantizationConfig = None  # type: ignore[assignment]
            self.operator_type_config: Dict[str, Optional[QuantizationConfig]] = {}

        def set_global(self, quantization_config: QuantizationConfig):
            self.global_config = quantization_config
            return self

        def set_config_for_operator_type(
            self, operator_type: str, quantization_config: QuantizationConfig
        ):
            self.operator_type_config[operator_type] = quantization_config
            return self

        def annotate(self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule) -> torch.fx.GraphModule:
            """just handling global spec for now"""
            global_config = self.global_config
            self.annotate_symmetric_config(model, global_config)

            return model

        def annotate_symmetric_config(
            self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule, config: QuantizationConfig
        ) -> torch.fx.GraphModule:
            self._annotate_linear(model, config)
            for node in reversed(model.graph.nodes):
                self._annotate_conv2d(node, config)

>                 self._annotate_maxpool2d(node, config)

Author: Thanks for the comment. Based on latest PRs, they can been implemented similarly now. I have unified it.

> (prototype) PyTorch Quantization 2.0 Tutorial

Reviewer 2: nit: should be: Quantization in PyTorch 2.0 Export

Author: Thanks. The title and filename updated accordingly.

> ==========================================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=====================================================
```

Author: Done

Today we have `FX Graph Mode
Quantization <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/quantization.html#prototype-fx-graph-mode-quantization>`__

> which uses symbolic_trace to capture the model into a graph, and then

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which uses ``symbolic_trace`` to capture the model into a graph, and then
```

perform quantization transformations on top of the captured model. In a
similar way, for Quantization 2.0 flow, we will now use the PT2 Export

> workflow to capture the model into a graph, and perform quantizations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
workflow to capture the model into a graph, and perform quantization
```

> transformations on top of the ATen dialect graph. This is expected to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transformations on top of the ATen dialect graph. This approach is expected to
```

Author: Done

have significantly higher model coverage, better programmability, and
a simplified UX.

> 

Reviewer 3: I would add prerequisites here. Something like this

Prerequisites
-------------

This tutorial requires the following:
- Understanding of quantization concepts in PyTorch - link to resource (other tutorials or docs)
- Pytorch 2.0 or later
- ....

Author: Thanks for the suggestions. The Prerequisites are added.

> Suppose we are a backend developer and we wish to integrate our backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Imagine a backend developer who wishes to integrate a third-party backend
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions and changed.

> with PyTorch's quantization 2.0 flow. We only need to define the backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with PyTorch's quantization 2.0 flow. To accomplish this, they would only need to define the backend
```

> specific quantizer. The high level arch of quantization 2.0 with quantizer could be: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specific quantizer. The high level architecture of quantization 2.0 with quantizer could look like this: 
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions and changed.

.. image:: /_static/img/quantization/pytorch_quantization_2_0_diagram.png

> An existing quantizer object defined for QNNPack/XNNPack is here 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An existing quantizer object defined for QNNPack/XNNPack is located in 
```

`QNNPackQuantizer <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/main/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/qnnpack_quantizer.py>`__.

> Taking QNNPackQuantizer as example, the overall Quantization 2.0 flow could be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Taking QNNPackQuantizer as an example, the overall Quantization 2.0 flow could be:
```

    class M(torch.nn.Module):
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(5, 10)

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.linear(x)

    example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 5),)
    model = M().eval()

    # Step 1: Trace the model into an FX graph of flattened ATen operators
    exported_graph_module, guards = torchdynamo.export(
        model,
        *copy.deepcopy(example_inputs),
        aten_graph=True,
    )

    # Step 2: Insert observers or fake quantize modules
    quantizer = qq.QNNPackQuantizer()
    operator_config = qq.get_symmetric_quantization_config(is_per_channel=True)
    quantizer.set_global(operator_config)
    prepared_graph_module = prepare_pt2e_quantizer(exported_graph_module, quantizer)

    # Step 3: Quantize the model
    convered_graph_module = convert_pt2e(prepared_graph_module)

    # Step 4: Lower Reference Quantized Model into the backend

Inside the Quantizer, we will use the `QuantizationAnnotation API <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tjIsL7-uVgm_1bv_kUK7iovP6G1D5zcbzwEcmYEG2Js/edit#>`__
to convey user's intent for what quantization spec to use and how to

> observe certain tensor values in the prepare step. Now, we will have a step by step

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
observe certain tensor values in the prepare step. Now, we will have a step-by-step
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions and changed.

tutorial for how to use the `QuantizationAnnotation API` to create a quantizer.

> 1. Define QuantizationConfig

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Define ``QuantizationConfig``
```

Author: Thanks and changed.

--------------------------------------------------------

`QuantizationConfig <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/73fd7235ad25ff061c087fa4bafc6e8df4d9c299/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/quantizer.py#L103-L109>`__
consists of `QuantizationSpec <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/73fd7235ad25ff061c087fa4bafc6e8df4d9c299/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/quantizer.py#L28-L66>`__

> for activation, weight and bias seperately. Each `QuantizationSpec` defines the data type, qscheme and other quantization parameters used to create the observer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for activation, weight, and bias separately. Each `QuantizationSpec` defines the data type, ``qscheme``, and other quantization parameters used to create the observer.
```

Author: Thanks and changed.

When annotating the model, methods of
`get_act_qspec <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/73fd7235ad25ff061c087fa4bafc6e8df4d9c299/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/utils.py#L9>`__,
`get_weight_qspec <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/73fd7235ad25ff061c087fa4bafc6e8df4d9c299/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/utils.py#L26>`__ and
`get_bias_qspec <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/73fd7235ad25ff061c087fa4bafc6e8df4d9c299/torch/ao/quantization/_pt2e/quantizer/utils.py#LL42C5-L42C19>`__
are used to get the `QuantizationSpec` from `QuantizationConfig` for a specific node. Then corresponding observer will be created

> based on this node's `QuantizationSpec`. Suppose we want use these quantization parameters for activation, weight and bias:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
based on this node's `QuantizationSpec`. For example, we want to use these quantization parameters for activation, weight, and bias:
```

-  Activation: `int8` data type, `per_tensor_affine` quantization, `HistogramObserver`
-  Weight    : `int8` data type, `per_channel_symmetric` quantization, `PerChannelMinMaxObserver`
-  Bias      : `float` data type, `PlaceholderObserver`

> We can define the `QuantizationConfig` as below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can define the ``QuantizationConfig`` as below:
```

            quant_min=-128,
            quant_max=127,
            qscheme=torch.per_tensor_affine,
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=act_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(eps=2**-12),
        )

        weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = PerChannelMinMaxObserver
        extra_args: Dict[str, Any] = {"eps": 2**-12}
        weight_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-127,
            quant_max=127,
            qscheme=torch.per_channel_symmetric,
            ch_axis=0,
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(**extra_args),
        )

        bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = PlaceholderObserver
        bias_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.float,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr
        )
        quantization_config = QuantizationConfig(
            act_quantization_spec, weight_quantization_spec, bias_quantization_spec
        )
        return quantization_config

> 2. Define the BackendQuantizer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Define the ``BackendQuantizer``
```

Author: Thanks and changed.

            """annotate nodes in the graph with observer or fake quant constructors
            to convey the desired way of quantization.
            """
            global_config = self.global_config
            self.annotate_symmetric_config(model, global_config)

            return model

        def annotate_symmetric_config(
            self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule, config: QuantizationConfig
        ) -> torch.fx.GraphModule:
            for node in reversed(model.graph.nodes):
                # The annotation methods for each op will defined later
                pass
            return model

        def validate(self, model: torch.fx.GraphModule) -> None:
            """validate the annotated graph is supported by the backend"""
            pass

        @classmethod
        def get_supported_operators(cls) -> List[OperatorConfig]:
            """return the operator list which is supported by the backend"""
            return []

3. Annotate common operator patterns
--------------------------------------------------------

Now we will start to define the annotatation methods inside quantizer. For common operators like `conv2d`, we can use `QuantizationSpec` to

> annotate the input, weight, bias and output.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
annotate the input, weight, bias, and output.
```

Author: Thanks and changed.

                conv_node.op != "call_function"
                or conv_node.target != torch.ops.aten.convolution.default
            ):
                raise ValueError(f"{conv_node} is not an aten conv2d operator")
            # skip annotation if it is already annotated
            if _is_annotated([conv_node]):
                continue

            input_qspec_map = {}
            input_act = conv_node.args[0]
            assert isinstance(input_act, Node)
            input_qspec_map[input_act] = get_act_qspec(quantization_config)

            weight = conv_node.args[1]
            assert isinstance(weight, Node)
            input_qspec_map[weight] = get_weight_qspec(quantization_config)

            bias = conv_node.args[2]
            if isinstance(bias, Node):
                input_qspec_map[bias] = get_bias_qspec(quantization_config)

            conv_node.meta["quantization_annotation"] = QuantizationAnnotation(
                input_qspec_map=input_qspec_map,
                output_qspec=get_act_qspec(quantization_config),
                _annotated=True,
            )

4. Annotate sharing qparams operators
--------------------------------------------------------

> For operator such as `add` and `cat`, which we want the two inputs sharing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For operator such as ``add`` and ``cat``, which we want the two inputs sharing
```

> quantization parameters, we can use the `SharedQuantizationSpec` to make the two inputs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
quantization parameters, we can use the ``SharedQuantizationSpec`` to make the two inputs
```

        self, gm: torch.fx.GraphModule, quantization_config: QuantizationConfig
    ) -> None:
        add_partitions = get_source_partitions(gm.graph, [operator.add, torch.add])
        add_partitions = list(itertools.chain(*add_partitions.values()))
        for add_partition in add_partitions:
            add_node = add_partition.output_nodes[0]
            if _is_annotated([add_node]):
                continue
            act_qspec = get_act_qspec(quantization_config)

            input_qspec_map = {}
            input_act0 = add_node.args[0]
            input_act1 = add_node.args[1]

            share_qparams_with_input_act0_qspec = SharedQuantizationSpec((input_act0, add_node))

            input_qspec_map = {input_act0: act_qspec, input_act1: share_qparams_with_input_act0_qspec}

            add_node.meta["quantization_annotation"] = QuantizationAnnotation(
                input_qspec_map=input_qspec_map,
                output_qspec=act_qspec,
                _annotated=True,
            )

5. Annotate fixed qparams operators
--------------------------------------------------------

For operator such as `sigmoid`, which has predefined and fixed scale/zero_point,

> we can use fixed parameters for it with `FixedQParamsQuantizationSpec`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
we can use fixed parameters for it with ``FixedQParamsQuantizationSpec``.
```

::

    def _annotate_sigmoid(
        self, gm: torch.fx.GraphModule, quantization_config: QuantizationConfig
    ) -> None:
        sigmoid_partitions = get_source_partitions(gm.graph, [torch.nn.Sigmoid])
        sigmoid_partitions = list(itertools.chain(*sigmoid_partitions.values()))
        for sigmoid_partition in sigmoid_partitions:
            sigmoid_node = sigmoid_partition.output_nodes[0]

            input_act = sigmoid_node.args[0]
            assert isinstance(input_act, Node)
            act_qspec = FixedQParamsQuantizationSpec(
                dtype=torch.uint8,
                quant_min=0,
                quant_max=255,
                qscheme=torch.per_tensor_affine,
                scale=2.0 / 256.0,
                zero_point=128,
            )
            sigmoid_node.meta["quantization_annotation"] = QuantizationAnnotation(
                input_qspec_map={
                    input_act: act_qspec,
                },
                output_qspec=act_qspec,
                _annotated=True,
            )

6. Annotate tensor with derived quantization parameters
--------------------------------------------------------

> `DerivedQuantizationSpec` is the quantization spec for the Tensors whose quantization parameters are derived from other Tensors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``DerivedQuantizationSpec`` is the quantization spec for the Tensors whose quantization parameters are derived from other Tensors.
```

> For example, we want to define the scale, zp for bias derived from activation and weight of convolution node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, we want to define the scale, ``zp`` for bias derived from activation, and weight of convolution node.
```

                act_obs_or_fq = obs_or_fqs[0]
                weight_obs_or_fq = obs_or_fqs[1]
                act_scale, act_zp = act_obs_or_fq.calculate_qparams()
                weight_scale, weight_zp = weight_obs_or_fq.calculate_qparams()
                return torch.tensor([act_scale * weight_scale]).to(torch.float32), torch.tensor([0]).to(torch.int32)

            bias_qspec = DerivedQuantizationSpec(
                derived_from=[(input_act, node), (weight, node)],
                derive_qparams_fn=derive_qparams_fn,
                dtype=torch.int32,
                quant_min=-2**31,
                quant_max=2**31 - 1,
                qscheme=torch.per_tensor_symmetric,
            )
            input_qspec_map = {input_act: act_qspec, weight: weight_qspec, bias: bias_qspec}
            node.meta["quantization_annotation"] = QuantizationAnnotation(
                input_qspec_map=input_qspec_map,
                output_qspec=act_qspec,
                _annotated=True,
            )

7. A Toy Example with Resnet18 
--------------------------------------------------------

> After above annotation methods defined with `QuantizationAnnotation API`, we can now put them together for the BackendQuantizer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After above annotation methods defined with ``QuantizationAnnotation API``, we can now put them together for the ``BackendQuantizer``
```

            ch_axis=0,
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(**extra_args),
        )

        bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = PlaceholderObserver
        bias_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.float,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=bias_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr
        )
        quantization_config = QuantizationConfig(
            act_quantization_spec, weight_quantization_spec, bias_quantization_spec
        )
        return quantization_config

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 3, 224, 224),)
        m = torchvision.models.resnet18().eval()
        m_copy = copy.deepcopy(m)
        # program capture
        m, guards = torchdynamo.export(
            m,
            *copy.deepcopy(example_inputs),
            aten_graph=True,
        )    
        quantizer = BackendQuantizer()
        operator_config = get_symmetric_quantization_config()
        quantizer.set_global(operator_config)
        m = prepare_pt2e_quantizer(m, quantizer)
        after_prepare_result = m(*example_inputs)

>         m = convert_pt2e(m)

Reviewer 3: Can we please add a conclusion with that sum ups what the user has learned, what else to read/run with links to extra resources if applicable.

Author: Good suggestions. The conclusion and further reading links are added.
